Draft of the spec for the work package service (#65)
ghga-de/epic-docs: 26-dracula-ant/technical_specification.md

# Implementation of a work package service for CLI client authentication (Dracula Ant)

**Epic Type:** Implementation Epic
  
**Attention: Please do not put any confidential content here.**

## Scope:

We want to implement the work package service outlined in
https://docs.ghga-dev.de/main/architecture_concepts/ac001_file_validation_and_encryption.html#client-configuration-and-authorization

## Implementation Details:

### REST API

The Work Package Service REST API should have the following end points:

> - `POST /work_packages`

Author: Yes, hyphens seem to be common practice. I only used underscores because we did that already in the metadata repository service.

> - `POST /work_packages`

Reviewer: The metadata repository service will either way be refactored. We should not use it as a template.

> - `POST /work_packages`

Author: Ok, changed to hyphens now.

  - auth header: internal access token
  - request body:
    - `dataset_id`: str
    - `type`: enum (download/upload)
    - `file_ids`: array of strings  (empty = all files of the dataset)
    - `public_key`: string (the user's public Crypt4GH key)
  - response body:
    - `id`: the work package id
    - `token`: work package access token
- `GET /work_packages`
  - auth header: internal access token

>   - gets all list of all work packages of the current user

Author: See below.

> - `GET /work_packages/{id}`
>   - auth header: internal access token
>   - gets work package with given id if it belongs to the current user
> - `DELETE /work_packages/{id}`
>   - auth header: internal access token
>   - deletes work package with given id if it belongs to the current user
> - `GET /work_package`
>   - auth header: work package access token
>   - gets work package that has the same hash as the given token
>     (note that this is not really RESTful, the work package is passed in directly via the token)

Reviewer: Can be simplified as the UI does not need to retrieve a work package after creation at the moment:
```suggestion
- `GET /work_packages/{id}`
  - auth header: work package access token
  - gets work package with given id if it belongs to the current user and matches the ID specified in the token
- `DELETE /work_packages/{id}`
  - auth header: internal access token
  - deletes work package with given id if it belongs to the current user
```

Author: Simplified, but mention these as possible extension for later.

- `GET /work_order_token`
  - auth header: work package access token
  - query path parameter: `file_id`

>   - gets an encrypted work order token for the given work package access token

Author: Changed this now, assuming that the ID is passed together with the token from the frontend to the CLI.

### Work package access token

The work package access token is a random string generated by the Work Package Service on a POST request. Its SHA256 hash is stored in the database. The token itself is not stored, but it is encrypted with the `public_key` and then returned in the response.

### Work order token

This is a JWT with a very short time to live (maximum 30 seconds). It is signed by the Work Package Service and then encrypted with the `public_key` of the user, similar ot the work package access token. It contains the following claims:

- `type`: `download` or `upload`
- `file_id`: the id of the file that shall be downloaded or uploaded

> - `user_id`: the internal ID of the user

Author: Added now.

- `public_key`: the public key stored in the work package

> The work package access and work order tokens are both signed by the Work Package Service. A separate key pair (different from the keys used for the internal access tokens) should be created for this purpose. The public key must be also communicated to the download/upload controller services so that they can validate the work order token.

Reviewer: Work package access tokens are not signed as they are no JWT.

```suggestion
The work order tokens are signed by the Work Package Service. A separate key pair (different from the keys used for the internal access tokens) should be created for this purpose. The public key must be also communicated to the download/upload controller services so that they can validate the work order token.
```

Author: Access token is not signed

### Dataset access checks

In order to check whether a given user has access to a given dataset, the claims repository provides an *internal* RPC endpoint that would return `false` or `true` according to whether the user has access or not.

> - `/rpc/has_access?dataset_id=...&user_id=...`

Reviewer: Maybe we could also model it in a RESTful fashion like this:
GET /users/{user_id}/datasets/{dataset_id}/access_status

This endpoint will be consulted by the Work Package Service as well as the download/upload services controllers.

> Access permissions may later be stored in an internal database populated by evens sent by a data access service.

Reviewer: I would rather propose that the service will receive this information from the visa issuer later.

Author: Yes, removed that.

  - request body:
    - `dataset_id`: str (the ID of a dataset)
    - `type`: enum (download/upload)
    - `file_ids`: array of strings  (empty = all files of the dataset)
    - `public_key`: string (the user's public Crypt4GH key)
  - response body:
    - `id`: str (the work package ID)
    - `token`: str (encrypted work package access token)

Used by the CLI client to retrieve work packages and create work order tokens:

- `GET /work-packages/{work_package_id}`
  - auth header: work package access token
  - gets the specified work package
- `POST /work-packages/{work_package_id}/file/{file_id}/work-order-tokens`
  - auth header: work package access token
  - gets an encrypted work order token for the specified work package and file

The following endpoints could be added later to manage work packages in the web frontend,
but for now, this will *not* be implemented and they are not part of the API.

- `GET /work-packages`
  - auth header: internal access token
  - gets all list of all work packages of the current user
- `GET /work-packages/{work_package_id}`
  - auth header: internal access token
  - gets work package with given id if it belongs to the current user

> - `DELETE /work-packages/{work_package_id}`
>   - auth header: internal access token
>   - deletes work package with given id if it belongs to the current user

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: This is not part of the spec, just a suggestion, but I have now added a note how deletion should be handled.

  expires: datetime  # expiry date of this work package
```

The `file_ids` list must not be empty. It contains either the `file_ids` specified by the user when creating the work package (in this case the Work Package Service checks whether they belong to the given `dataset_id`), or the full list of all `file_id`s that belong to the given `dataset_id`.

> An entry in the `WorkPackage` collection is only created by the Work Package Service after verification tht the user with the given `user_id` is allowed to access the dataset with the given `dataset_id` (see access checks above).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An entry in the `WorkPackage` collection is only created by the Work Package Service after verification that the user with the given `user_id` is allowed to access the dataset with the given `dataset_id` (see access checks above).
```

> In the database, the Work Package Service also keeps track of which file IDs belong to which dataset and which users are allowed to submit data for the individual datasets. The following association collection is used for this purpose:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the database, the Work Package Service also keeps track of which file IDs belong to which dataset. The following association collection is used for this purpose:
```

```python
DatasetFiles:
  dataset_id: str  # (should have a unique index)
  file_ids: list[str]  # all file IDs that are part of the dataset

>   submitter_ids: list[str]  # all users allowed to submit the dataset

Reviewer: Diese permission information würde ich mir immer frisch aus dem claims repo holen und nur für einen benutzer bei bedarf.
```suggestion
```

```

> To populate this collections, the Work Package Service listens to events from the file submission service (submission store).

Reviewer: Ist bislang noch nicht geklärt:

```suggestion
To populate this collections, the Work Package Service listens to events published by another service (to be clarified).
```
